The Project Gutenberg eBook of Preservation of forests as a measure
of public safety, by L. Baeta-Neves

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Preservation of forests as a measure of public safety
       Address before the 17th National Irrigation Congress, Spokane,
       Wash., August, 1909

Author: L. Baeta-Neves

Release Date: January 26, 2023 [eBook #69881]

Language: English

Produced by: Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRESERVATION OF FORESTS AS A
MEASURE OF PUBLIC SAFETY ***





                        PRESERVATION OF FORESTS
                                 AS A
                       MEASURE OF PUBLIC SAFETY


                     Address Delivered Before the
                              Seventeenth
                     National Irrigation Congress


                                HELD AT
                     SPOKANE, WASHINGTON, U. S. A.
                             AUGUST, 1909.


                       BY THE BRAZILIAN DELEGATE
              L. BAETA-NEVES, Mining and Civil Engineer.




      THE PRESERVATION OF FORESTS AS A MEASURE OF PUBLIC SAFETY.

 Address before the 17th National Irrigation Congress, Spokane, Wash.,
                             August, 1909.

                                  by

                            L. BAETA-NEVES

    Mining and Civil Engineer; Graduate of the Ouro Prete Mining
    School, Brazil; Chief of the Technical Department of the
    Directory of Railway and Public Works in Minas Geraes, Brazil;
    Member of the Historic and Geographic Institute of the same
    state; Member of the National Geographic Society of Washington;
    Knight of Columbus; Honorary Member of the Rotary Club of Los
    Angeles, Cal.; Representative of the Brazilian Government
    before the Scientific Congresses 16th Irrigation and 3rd Dry
    Farming in America, and Vice-President and Corresponding
    Secretary of this Congress; Special Delegate of Brazil before
    the 17th National Irrigation Congress at Spokane, Wash., where,
    by selection, he addressed the meeting on behalf of the Foreign
    Representatives.


I really feel glad and exceedingly honored in coming again before this
Congress and my pleasure is great in telling you once more how much I
appreciate the warm welcome of the North American people, and how much
I have enjoyed the pleasant stay in this most hospitable city.

I come now with the same feelings and sentiment that I tried to
translate to you on the opening session of this most important meeting
full of very valuable lessons from any view point; on that day I had
the great honor of speaking to you on behalf of the foreign delegates
of this convention bringing greetings from the Brazilian Government and
from the different nations here represented. But now, allow me to say,
Americans, and distinguished representatives of foreign continents and
islands, that translating the good feelings and altruistic sentiment
of the people of the countries of Columbus, I am going to speak with
my whole soul, my whole heart, on behalf of the sacred rights of
humanity, addressing you on a subject very dear to me in which I have
been deeply interested since my childhood; a subject on which I have
learned a great deal from two men of universal reputation, who, for
the glory of the western hemisphere, were born under the purest sky
of America――I mean Roosevelt and Gifford Pinchot. I stand for the
forest, for the preservation of forests as a measure of public safety.
My paper is in part an extract of a report that I sent to Brazil to be
read this week at the request of the 4th International American Medical
Congress, held now at Rio De Janeiro “on the most efficacious means
of preventing and lessening the effects of periodical droughts.” In
that paper I wrote about the lessons of the Irrigation Congress, which
lessons we are already profiting by, having improved the Irrigation
projects of which I wrote the address printed in the proceedings of
the 16th National Irrigation Congress, last year. I am pleased to say
that in this report I emphasized also the great work which has been
done by the dry farming Congress, whose lessons are the best to teach
the people of the arid district of the world, how to use profitably
by the water, almost always so expensive and difficult to be obtained
in such districts. You will find on the last proceedings of the dry
farming Congress at Cheyenne, a paper of mine on the combination of
irrigation and dry fanning processes, which combination I think will
give the best results in rendering more fit to sustain life a region
subject to drought. To the medical Congress, I suggested that a branch
of the dry farming of America should be established in Brazil according
to the wishes of its indefatigable secretary my good friend Mr. John T.
Burns. Being requested by his excellency Governor Norris, of Montana to
work in Brazil, as a vice-president and corresponding secretary of the
Congress I feel exceedingly honored in giving my very best service to
my brothers of North America, assuring them that they can count upon my
great admiration for your country, where I am living for one year with
my family always in close touch with the American family and people.
Allow me to say, ladies and gentlemen, that keeping the same love for
my native land, in my heart, will have for ever a warm room for the
American people. But let me stop, ladies and gentlemen, of speaking of
my feeling that, in spite of my sincerity, I cannot express by words
as they come from the bottom of my heart; the whole session would be
too short for translating them and I must go back to the subject of my
paper. In my report to the International Medical Congress I wrote also
about the Cactus of Luther Burbank, of California, and incidentally I
called the attention of the Brazilian Engineers to the recent process
in which the English government is now interested, facilitating the
atmospheric precipitations for small water supply near the coast,
causing the deposit of dew as has been practiced in Gibraltar. I have
read something about this process on an interesting paper of Mr. George
Hurbard read this year on March 3rd, before the Royal Society of Arts,
London: I wrote too about the forests considering them like I am about
to do.

The importance of forests as protectors of mankind is an incontrovertible
fact, and there is no spirit, less observing as it may be, that has not
noticed, even slightly, some influence of the trees in benefitting life.

At different times I have treated this important subject that impressed
me so much, in the national and foreign press and in public addresses
here in America, several times discussing the influence of the trees
upon our life. Once speaking about the combined work of medicine and
engineering in the noble and humanitarian campaign to improve the means
of life on the surface of this planet, especially to preserve and
increase the vigor of the people, I said in part:

“Life progressively is becoming very difficult to be preserved in
good conditions because of the incessant exhaustion of elements that
are favorable to it on the surface of the earth, where a continuous
transformation is observed all over.

“The forests, the best protectors of our life, are going fast, and from
the modification that their disappearance is bringing to the climate
and to the natural conditions all over the earth, will come serious
troubles to the solution of the sanitary problems in the future.

“It is necessary to use intelligently so important elements of life,
without so barbarous destructions, because so far as the present
scientific knowledge is concerned, there is no doubt, at all, that
from the lack of the forest will come the greatest modifications
in the meteorological conditions of the earth, and you know, the
meteorological conditions――the weather――has the most positive
influence on our life. This influence does not appear only on the
health conditions, but, too, in the most complicate social phenomena.

“The old proverb――‘Man is the son of his environments’――is a translation
of a truth scientifically demonstrated, proving the weather’s influence.
It is true that it means the law of adaptation, but the environments of
man depend entirely upon the meteorological conditions. According to
this law we could, perhaps, live even under bad conditions of weather,
but such condition would bring an unhealthy condition of life, too.

“Professor Dexter, of the University of Illinois, studying the mental
and physiological influence of the meteorological conditions, in one
of his books, gives a comprehensive study of the question, proving the
weather’s influence on the organic and intellectual life, the emotions,
the literary sentiments, the individual conduct. He proves principally
that the change of meteorological conditions affects the health more
than anything else.

“Under bad meteorological conditions we never would have the necessary
reserve of energy for the complete activity of life.

“And good meteorological conditions can be guaranteed only by the
preservation of forests, that, unhappily for our future, does not
receive from the people the deserved attention.”

Since the colonial time many Brazilians have been considering the
forests from a sanitary viewpoint. The patriarch of our independence
José Bonifacio in 1815 wrote these phrases:

“What other productions of Mother Nature ought to deserve greater
attention from the philosophers and statemen than the forests and
trees? Trees, wood and timber: Only these words, well meditated upon
and understood, are enough to awaken our whole sensibility.”

Besides other reasons there is a powerful one that makes necessary
the protection of forest――its great influence upon health. Health is
all, and upon it reposes the happiness of people and the greatness and
prosperity of the countries.

On account of a rapid progress we must not sacrifice the forests as it
has been done in many new countries.

Any progress detrimental to the vital forces of nature, is negative,
ephemeral; if one generation profits by it, the following one fatally
will suffer its consequences.

This axiom, in my humble opinion, translates better the decline
and disappearance of some nations that figured in antiquity than
any explanation given by the modern philosophy for the fact; and
forethought advises to profit by the practical lesson contained within
it, preserving our natural resources in order not to sacrifice to a
temporary greatness the best means of preserving life, which means are
represented by the forest.

The trees are great regulators of many conditions of life, principally
facilitating the atmospheric precipitation and their profit. The
aqueous vapors penetrating the cool atmosphere of the forest at the
contact of the foliage of the trees, condense resolving into rain
or dew; and the water that falls on the soil, protected against
evaporation by the shade, having its surface-flow impeded and its
absorption facilitated by the roots, penetrates in greatest quantity
into the land, guaranteeing the permanency and abundance of the source
that it forms.

The rainfall without the protecting vegetation rapidly flows on
the surface soil forming the run-off, which takes from the earth
the fertilizing humus, excavating the mountain and producing the
destructive overflow in the valley.

In the countries where ice and snow do not appear the regimen of
the water courses in a great measure depends upon the vegetation
that covers the head of the streams; and such an influence is as
great as the porosity of the soil is small in the generative basin
of the sources. If there is yet controversy which is progressively
disappearing with more serious study about some forests’ influences,
there is not, all over the earth, any one who can scientifically
contest this truth that history and geography, the facts of the past
and the observation of the present so clearly confirm. The Nile, which
comes from the heart of Africa, born among the virgin forests where
fire and men never have penetrated, keeps today, in an average, the
same flow that it had when it fertilized Egypt at the time of the
Pharaohs.

The effects of forests do not appear in confined zones. Their
influence is not bounded by a certain region, and the calamity coming
from their devastation passes over the individual property affecting
the public welfare. This is an incontestible truth that science
demonstrates and facts corroborate. Therefore there is no reason why
protection of forest must be concerned to a certain extension, not
affecting the private lands.

The individual right ought not to affect the high interests of
the Union which ought to save its own future, guaranteeing by the
preservation of the natural resources of the country, the general
well-being of the present and future generations.

This rational theory, applied to the case of forests, each day
gains assent in this country being already accepted in the higher
tribunals in favor of the legislation protecting such resources, which
legislation is earnestly advocated by President Roosevelt, accordingly
it was adopted on March 10, 1903 by the supreme court of Maine, and
on April 6th of the same year, the supreme court of the United States
sustained it, confirming the opinion of the court of errors and appeals
of New Jersey.

To the glory of us Brazilians this principle is the confirmation of a
doctrine of which I spoke last here at Albuquerque, promulgated in 1892
by the eminent Brazilian, Dr. Francisco Saturnino Rodrigues de Brito,
who wrote:

“The argument against such laws has no reason for being, because the
owner of the land is only a steward of the soil that was entrusted to
him by the past generations; he is the depository of lands as he is a
depository of capital, and thus, as it has a social origin, territorial
property must have a social application, in attending to collective
interest; and these require the individual effort of each man to
preserve and improve on the planet the necessary means of living, among
which are the preservation and replantation of forests, that may keep
the necessary moisture for regular rainfall and the normal distribution
of water, detaining it among their roots and not permitting the
destructive overflows that take from the soil the fertilizing humus.
The argument has no reason for being, also, because the interest of
the family itself requires providence against the prodigal member who
steals from his own children the inheritance from the past, giving to
this improvident and egotistical father only the income of it; and as
it happens with the inheritance, legislative enactment must regulate
the question of lands for the interest of the social community that has
a great attainment from the Past, and comprehending the Present and the
Future.”

The arguments of President Roosevelt are very similar to those of the
illustrious Brazilian engineer and the same thing can be said in regard
to the reasons presented by the Supreme Court of the United States as
quoted by the American President:

“The State, as quasi-sovereign and representative of the interest of
the public, has a standing in court to protect the atmosphere, the
water and forests either in its territory, irrespective of the ascent
or descent of the private owner of the land most immediately concerned.”

I am deeply convinced that the conscientious scruples of a great many
of our eminent legislators and loyal men in accepting this doctrine
lie only in the fact that they are always busy with something else,
never dedicating themselves to any serious study of the forests in
their relations to life and the progress of countries; they have never
considered that, on account of such relation, the sacred rights of
humanity, the life of our children and future generations require a
direct and immediate protection for the trees, which protection is
undoubtedly a measure of public safety. And really such a protection
is as important as any other measure that may prevent the invasion and
spread of some epidemic disease.

To the 4th Latin-American Congress I moved that all possible effort
should be made to have Brazil and all nations represented at the
congress accept the proposition that is found in my address of forests
last year, which proposition I write now as follows:

“_Preservation of forests in many ways necessary, must be considered as
a measure of public safety and it is of urgent necessity to maintain
the permanency and abundance not only of the stream flow, but, of the
underground waters._”[1]

This proposition, ladies and gentlemen, will do some good for our
forests when thoroughly accepted in the countries where the question
of right of property has been an obstacle to the protection laws for
saving the trees on the private lands.

I make an appeal to you, gentlemen, of all different nations here
represented to bring with you the ideas contained in this paper whose
value lies only on the strong conviction with which I wrote it.

Let us be united all over the world in this great and noblest campaign
for the life of mankind, for the life of our own children, the water,
the pure air, the shade of relief of fatigue, the timber, in resume,
the life itself. Let us profit by the great lessons of Gifford Pinchot,
accepting the wise advice of greatest men of the past and present
generations. And may this alarm-cry arouse the energies of the present
for the solution of the great problem of the future.


      MEANS ADVISED TO PREVENT THE CUTTING OF FORESTS IN BRAZIL.

After the approbation of the proposition contained in the first part
of my address considering the protection of the forests as a measure
of public safety, we must have some restriction from the states in
regard to the use of the generative land of courses, establishing the
protective areas, even approximately, according to the good sense,
putting them under a provisory police of the tax collectors and the
patriotism of the people, until we can get the resources for a most
effective police.

We must get annually from the Federal Congress some appropriation,
however small, to start the National Forestry Reservation at the
head of the great and navigable rivers, progressively enlarging such
reservation until it has a sufficient extension.

I think that in general the forests would be preserved if the people
knew how to use them systematically if efficient means of preservation
of timber could be obtained, in order to use the softer and light
wood as good material, avoiding, as said by the illustrious engineer,
Joaquim Julio Proenca, the devastation of the virgin forests for
hardwoods to be employed in construction of certain importance,
principally railroads; if we could plant good species, growing fast
to be used as fuel and good timber, for instance, the eucalyptus as
is being done in California, and was advised in Minas Geraes by the
distinguished botanist engineer, Alvaro da Silveira, and if we could
stop or diminish the clearing of forests or old process of burning the
forests for fuel and agricultural purposes by divulging the scientific
processes of cultivation, and profit by using green wood as a fuel
in great factories, using dry stoves heated by the furnace gases, as
established by the deceased President Joao Pinheiro in his factory at
Caeté, Minas Geraes, Brazil.

From these considerations we have many suggestions how to protect the
trees, but, certainly, the suggested measures and those profitable ones
found in many forestry codes in our states, must not be taken only
by the Union, whose service, as I said before, must be as simple and
economic as possible in order to be stable.

The Federal Government in accordance with the states must help the
development of the instruction on forestry, establishing special
forestry gardens, however small, connected with botanical branch in
the engineering courses, for better knowledge and trial of species
of rapid growth, suitable for construction and railroad ties; must
promote replantation of resistant trees such as eucalyptus in the
arid region, principally where the sources permanently or temporarily
appear; must promote the employing of light and white soft timber by
giving premiums to the inventor of the best and most economic process
for its preservation, and finally, must make every possible propaganda
by publication of short and practical papers and so on among farmers on
the influence and value of the forests.

    [1] In my book on the water supply and sewers of Caxambu,
    Minas Geraes, Brazil, I explained the influence of the forests
    upon the underground water in a chapter under the title
    “Preservation of the sources.”


                   *       *       *       *       *


 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Obvious printer’s, punctuation, and spelling inaccuracies were
   silently corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRESERVATION OF FORESTS AS A
MEASURE OF PUBLIC SAFETY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
